---
title: Neural unresponsiveness to fairness in MDD patients — state or trait?
seo_title: Neural unresponsiveness to fairness in MDD patients — state or trait?
summary: A research proposal drafted by me and two other classmates for a graduate course in neuroeconomics taught by Joseph Kable at UPenn.
description: A research proposal drafted by me and two other classmates for a graduate course in neuroeconomics taught by Joseph Kable at UPenn.
slug: math-typesetting
author: Ammar M. Plumber

draft: false
date: 2020-11-16T21:21:46-05:00
lastmod: 
expiryDate: 
publishDate: 

feature_image: 
feature_image_alt: 

categories:
  - Academic
tags:
  - Neuroscience
  - Economics
  - Neuroeconomics
  - SCAN
series: 

toc: true
related: true
social_share: true
newsletter: false
disable_comments: false
---

## Background and Motivations

Depression is one the most common mental illnesses and can cause
significant impairment in the lives of its sufferers. Some common
symptoms include sleep disturbance, anhedonia, feelings of hopelessness,
suicidal thoughts, fatigue, difficulty with decision-making, and a loss
of pleasure and interest in activities that were once enjoyable (NIMH).
With the symptoms and experiences of those with depression being so
varied, identifying behavioral and neural differences in the brains of
depressed individuals is an important step in the development of better
treatments. The Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) framework emphasizes
studying symptoms using a variety of neuroscientific and behavioral
approaches, which is achieved by the proposed study. One fruitful lens
consists in the identification of neural patterns during strategic
gameplay. To this end, previous work has demonstrated neural differences
during strategic decision-making games between those with psychiatric
conditions and healthy control groups (Robson et al., 2020). However,
there is a lack of longitudinal studies of neuroeconomic gameplay in
patient populations, which has made it difficult to discern if
differences in gameplay and neural activation are static factors or if
these changes dynamically and directly result from conditions that can
be changed through treatment.

In the context of depression specifically, various functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) studies have identified differences in brain
activation between depressed patients and healthy controls when playing
the Ultimatum Game (UG). The UG is a well-established neuroeconomic
paradigm in which a responder decides whether to accept or reject a
proposer’s offer of a share of the proposer’s initial endowment. Should
the responder accept, the split is implemented. However, if the
responder rejects the offer, neither party receives any of the
endowment. We consider this paradigm useful for studying neural
signature correlations because it involves social cognition and a
gradient of fairness, which is apt for regression analysis. As the
fairness of the offers increased, the control group showed increased activation in
the nucleus accumbens (NAcc) and the dorsal caudate (DC) while the
depressed group did not (Gradin et al., 2015).

<img src="https://i.imgur.com/LFVmq0s.png" alt="**Figure 1.** From Gradin et al., 2015 summarizing their findings that healthy controls showed activation in the nucleus accumbens and dorsal caudate as the fairness of offers increased, while MDD patients did not." width="50%" />
<div class="item__description">
    <p><b>Figure 1.</b> From Gradin et al., 2015 summarizing their findings that
healthy controls showed activation in the nucleus accumbens and dorsal
caudate as the fairness of offers increased, while MDD patients did not.
</p>
</div>

These areas are thought to respond to reward and social information
(Gradin et al., 2015). Importantly, there were no differences in
rejection rates between the depressed and control groups, a finding
replicated by other groups (Mukherjee et al., 2020). There was also a
diminished response in the medial occipital lobe in the depressed group
relative to controls as unfairness increased (Gradin et al., 2015).
Figures 1 and 2 summarize these findings.

<img src="https://i.imgur.com/9RWagWh.png" alt="**Figure 2.** From Gradin et al., 2015 summarizing their findings that healthy controls had a greater increase in activation in the medial occipital lobe as inequality compared to depressed subjects." width="52%" />
<div class="item__description">
    <p><b>Figure 2.</b> From Gradin et al., 2015 summarizing their findings that
healthy controls had a greater increase in activation in the medial
occipital lobe as inequality increased compared to depressed subjects.
</p>
</div>

Previous work has also shown occipital lobe functioning differences in
depressed patients in emotion and social related tasks, as well as in
other disorders (e.g. social anxiety and schizophrenia) that include
social dysfunction symptoms (Li et al., 2013; Zhao et al., 2020; Goldin
et al., 2009; Bjorkquist and Herbener, 2013). In addition, the nucleus
accumbens has been used as a target for deep brain stimulation in
treatment-resistant depression with promising results (Bewernick et al.,
2010; Bewernick et al., 2012; Taghva et al., 2013), suggesting that
decreases in NAcc responses may play a causal role in the etiology of
depression. Given previous findings that established clear differences
between depressed and control groups in UG decision-making, social
cognition, and reward-related processing, we are choosing the nucleus
accumbens, the dorsal caudate, and the medial occipital lobe as the
regions of interest in our neuroimaging study.

Current treatments for depression include medications (typically
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors or SSRIs), psychotherapy, and
deep brain stimulation or electroconvulsive therapy in the case of
treatment-resistant depression. SSRIs are known to have mixed effects.
Indeed, while some patients do exhibit a significant response, up to 70%
will not exhibit symptom remission following their first course of SSRI
treatment (Gaynes et al. 2009; Trivedi et al., 2006). Additionally, up
to 40% of patients will be classified as treatment-resistant after
exhibiting minimal response to sequential SSRI treatment attempts
(Kulikov 2018; Gaynes et al., 2009). With most SSRIs taking roughly 4-6
weeks to take effect and a typical treatment period of several months to
a year followed by a weaning off period, a longitudinal design is useful
to capture any potential behavioral and neural changes as a result of
treatment. Previous neuroimaging data supports the idea that SSRI
treatment has a normalizing effect on the depressed brain and may also
offer insights into why different individuals have different responses
to treatment (Wessa and Lois, 2015). However, such studies have had
shorter timelines than what we propose and did not investigate behavior
in neuroeconomic gameplay as well.

We seek to address the lack of longitudinal studies of neuroeconomic
gameplay in those with depression through a longitudinal fMRI study of
both depressed patients and healthy controls. We hypothesize patients
with depression will initially exhibit decreased fairness-related
responses to ultimatums in the nucleus accumbens and dorsal caudate, and
decreased unfairness-related responses in the medial occipital lobe,
compared to control patients. Additionally, we hypothesize that
medication-assisted improvement in depression burden will be associated
with an attenuation of the diminished neural response to fairness in UG
responders. Regardless of the results of this study, the findings will
have important implications in both the fields of neuroeconomics and
computational psychiatry.

## Aims and Innovation

Ample data suggest that a number of event-related hemodynamic signals
are altered in MDD patients compared to healthy controls. However, few
neuroimaging studies follow patients beyond a few weeks following the
initiation of treatment (Wessa and Lois, 2015). Almost none have
established whether these signatures are static or dynamic. If these
patterns are static, we would expect them to exist throughout an
individual’s lifetime as a preexisting psychiatric risk factor. If they
are dynamic, they should normalize with successful treatment and,
therefore, reflect only the diagnostic state. Similarly, very few
studies have examined the stability of neural findings related to
neuroeconomic gameplay (Robson et al., 2020). Thus, the proposed
longitudinal study would be among the first of its kind. Our findings
will therefore offer unprecedented insight into the stability of
event-related findings in neuroeconomic gameplay, alongside an improved
understanding of the dynamic or static status of neural signatures of
MDD.

Significant heterogeneity characterizes the remission response of MDD
patients to SSRIs. Using a longitudinal study design combined with
regression analyses, we hope to determine whether this heterogeneity is
also represented in neural responses to unfairness and inequity that
have previously been shown in MDD patients. We also hope that by
approaching heterogeneity using regression analyses rather than by using
a questionnaire cut-off score for “responders” vs. “nonresponders”, as
has often been done in previous studies, we will more sensitively
capture the extent of this relationship. We anticipate that over the
course of treatment, initial neural differences between the depressed
and control subjects will decrease most robustly in patients that show
strong clinical response to SSRIs, showing that the SSRIs are able to
aid in any neural dysfunction that may lead to clinical depression. By
employing a longitudinal study that exceeds the length of the average
treatment course for SSRI therapy, we also hope to capture whether SSRIs
can correct brain states only while pharmacologically active
(i.e. during the treatment course) or whether the longer-term
application of SSRIs specifically result in corrective plastic changes
and thus allow for long-term remission of behavior.

## Methods

The proposed experimental timeline is summarized in Figure 3. During the
Recruitment phase, we recruit two groups of participants: one group of
MDD patients and one group of healthy controls. The MDD group will be
recruited through psychiatrists, who will refer interested candidates
upon diagnosis. The inclusion criteria for the MDD group are a diagnosis
from a referring psychiatrist, expected SSRI treatment onset in
responding patients within six weeks of the first scan and
treatment-naive prior to the experiment. This final specification is so
that we can clearly state that the findings at the time of the initial
scan are the result of untreated depression. The controls will be
recruited via local advertising. During an initial screening session, a
clinician will administer the 17-item Hamilton Depression Rating Scale
(HAMD) to both recruitment populations, and we exclude from the control
group applicants with a HAMD score greater than 7, indicating the
possibility of depression or dysphoria (Tolentina and Schmidt, 2018;
Carrozzino et al., 2020) or any history of psychiatric disorders,
including depression. We use HAMD to screen for controls for two
reasons: it has been shown to reliably isolate individuals with low
depression symptomatology, and it differs from the Beck Depression
Inventory-II, our regressor, in that the former is rated by an
interviewer rather than self-rated. We do not employ a cutoff HAMD score
for depression group members, as we consider a psychiatric diagnosis
sufficient for inclusion. Nonetheless, we administer the evaluation to
both groups for the sake of maintaining a uniform protocol. Subjects
will then take a BDI questionnaire and undergo a Baseline Scan while
playing the Ultimatum Game (described in detail below.)

During the Longitudinal Phase, every six months for three years,
participants complete a HAMD interview, a Beck Depression Inventory-II
(BDI-II) survey, and an Ultimatum Game task, the latter in an fMRI
scanner. If control group members at any stage score above 7 on the HAMD
evaluation, they are excluded from our analysis. The first session for
depression group members must take place less than six weeks prior, but
not following the start of, start of SSRI treatment. We choose a period
of three years because, though some regimens may last indefinitely,
SSRIs are typically administered for less than two years, and most take
less than six months to wean off of a successful treatment regimen (Jung
et al., 2016). Additionally, by three years post-diagnosis,
treatment-resistant patients will have been identified if they are
present in our sample. We want to know whether fairness/inequity
sensitivity regresses or maintains after patients wean off, which is why
we make the sample period long enough to capture post-treatment changes.
A longer timeframe may complicate the subject groupings; some controls
may become depressed or develop other psychiatric abnormalities over the
course of the experiment. Finally, longitudinal studies typically
exhibit high rates of attrition due to the challenges of re-testing the
same subjects, as myriad uncontrollable factors may reduce subjects’
ability or desire to participate (e.g. cross-country moves, medical
complications). As such, we believe three years achieves a satisfactory
balance between assessing persistence of treatment-related effects, and
ensuring the stability of psychiatric groupings while minimizing group
attrition.

<img src="https://i.imgur.com/si1mA57.png" width="75%" />
<div class="item__description">
    <p><b>Figure 3.</b> Experimental Timeline. Recruitment phase: Subjects will be
recruited via local and internet advertisements (control group) or via
psychiatrist referral. Control subjects will be screened using the
HAMD-17 questionnaire. A medical history of diagnosis or treatment of
any psychiatric disorder (defined by the DSM-V) or a HAMD-17 score &gt;7
(which could possibly indicate dysphoria or mild depression) will
disqualify control subjects from participating. A diagnosis of MDD and
referral by a psychiatrist will be considered sufficient for inclusion.
Baseline Scan: all participants will then undergo an initial BDI
questionnaire, then be asked to perform the Ultimatum game against a
computer during an fMRI scan. MDD patients will begin SSRI treatments
within six weeks of the initial scan. Longitudinal Phase: Subjects will
return every 6 months (with t=0 being time of diagnosis/initial
recruitment) for 3 years, during which sessions HAMD/BDI questionnaires
will be completed, and the UG/fMRI procedure will be repeated (total of
7 scans). If a control subject achieves a HAMD score &gt;7 at any time
point, they will be removed from all analyses.
</p>
</div>

The Ultimatum Game task is as follows. There are two roles: proposers
(pre-programmed) and responders (played by participants). So that the
game is experienced as socially interactive, we use deception to tell
responders that proposals are from real people, either playing
simultaneously via a connected computer network or proposed previously.
The proposer has an initial endowment, of which he offers a share to the
responder. Should the responder accept, the endowment is divided
accordingly. If the responder rejects the offer, neither player receives
any of the endowment.

<img src="https://i.imgur.com/lZd1VMg.png" width="50%" />
<div class="item__description">
    <p><b>Figure 4.</b> Ultimatum Game Setup. From Gradin et al., 2015. The initial screen shows the proposer’s initials. Subsequently, an offer is shown to the responder along with the two buttons for accepting and rejecting the offer. The duration of each screen is shown in seconds with rt signifying response time.
</p>
</div>

Participants are given fair and unfair offers and told that they will be
paid a percentage of their earnings at the end of the experiment. Fair
offers range from 38% to 50% of the initial endowment, and unfair offers
from 8% to 33%. Twenty-eight trials of each kind are randomly
interspersed, and the offers are matched for amount; for every fair
offer of a given amount, there is an unfair offer of the same amount but
smaller relative to the total endowment. This is to ensure that the
effect of fairness rather than material payoff is being assessed.

Regarding neural activity, we are interested in the hemodynamic response
in the regions of interest (ROIs) upon presentation of the offers—an
event-related design. We focus on three key regions: the dorsal caudate,
nucleus accumbens, and medial occipital lobe.

From a behavioral standpoint, we examine whether the acceptance and rejection rates differ between the two groups for both kinds of offers. In addition, after the scan, we present participants with eight fair/unfair offers (four of each type, matched for material payoff) and ask them to rate feelings on 9-point Likert scales along these four dimensions: happy, angry, sad, and betrayed. The average of four ratings for each individual is represented by $L_{g,j,k,t}$ where $g$ = {MDD, Controls}; $j$ = {happy, angry, sad, betrayed}; $k$ = {fair, unfair}; and $t$ is the time period.

Upon collection of this data, we first intend to replicate the analyses of Gradin et al. (2015). Primarily, this involves comparing the correlations between regional BOLD signal and fairness/inequity for the two groups in the first session and confirming that the mOCC is less sensitive to inequity and DC and NAcc are less sensitive to fairness among depressed people prior to treatment than healthy controls. Note that these correlations for each individual are represented by $r_{g,h,k,t}$ where $g$ = {MDD, Controls}; $h$ = {DC, NAcc, mOCC}; $k$ = {fairness, unfairness}; and $t$ is the time period. For evaluating effects of fairness, r is defined as the correlation between BOLD signal and the percent of the endowment for fair offers, ranging from 38% to 50%. For offer unfairness, r is the correlation between BOLD signal and offer inequality for unfair offers, ranging from 33% (minimally unequal) to 8% (maximally unequal). To ensure that the correlation between mOCC BOLD signal and unfairness will be positive like in Gradin et al. (2015), we encode unfair offer percentages as the proposer’s share (67% to 92%). The overall pattern of the expected findings are similar to those seen in Figures 1 and 2 above. 

Like in Gradin et al. (2015), we do not expect to find differences in
sadness, anger, or betrayal emotionality scores, either during the
baseline scan or during subsequent scans, between control subjects and
MDD patients. However, we predict that there will be a statistically
significant difference between initial happiness ratings for fair offers
and that the two groups’ ratings will converge as SSRI treatment
progresses. We expect that the degree of convergence in each period will
be correlated with the extent of symptom reduction (ΔBDI) for each MDD
subject but that these two factors will exhibit minimal correlation for
control subjects. Figure 5 shows an example of the expected findings for
these experiments.

<img src="https://i.imgur.com/GbljDZY.jpg" width="70%" />
<div class="item__description">
    <p><b>Figure 5.</b> Expected results pertaining to happiness ratings in
response to fairness. Left: Happiness ratings over time for control
(black trace) and MDD (red trace) subjects. Right: Correlation between
individual subjects’ change in BDI score from baseline scan to 3yr scan
and the mean change in happiness ratings across the same timeframe.
</p>
</div>

Using data from subsequent sessions, we wish to examine whether MDD
group patterns—both neural and behavioral—converge with the control
group patterns as depression symptoms abate. For each individual in the
depression group, we will compute inter-period changes relative to
controls in ROI responsiveness to fairness/inequity.

$$\Delta r_{Comparison,h,t} = (r_{MDD,h,t} - \overline{r_{Control,h,t}})-(r_{MDD,h,t-1} - \overline{r_{Control,h,t-1}})$$

We also compute changes in self-reported emotionality scores relative to
controls for fair/unfair offers.

$$\Delta L_{Comparison,j,k,t} = (L_{MDD,j,k,t} - \overline{L_{Control,j,k,t}})-(L_{MDD,j,k,t-1}-\overline{L_{Control,j,k,t-1}})$$

We regress these values on changes in BDI-II score across periods. For
ROI regression models, a negative coefficient implies that a decrease in
BDI-II predicts an increase in regional responsiveness.

<center>
Overall BDI model: $\Delta r_{Comparison,h,t} = \alpha_0 + \alpha_1 * \Delta BDI_t$
</center>

Similar patterns as those exhibited in Gradin et al. (2015) are expected
with regards to ROI sensitivity to fairness and inequity. In the first
set of trials, we expect that, relative to controls, the MDD group will
exhibit less sensitivity to increased fairness in the NAcc and DC ROIs.
Moreover, the depressed group is initially expected to show less mOCC
sensitivity to inequity than controls. Insofar as treatment is effective
and BDI-II scores show reduction, we expect to observe neural
convergence between MDD patients and controls. Example results of the
expected relationships for NAcc and mOCC responses are shown in Figure
6. We expect the pattern related to the DC to look very similar to that
for the NAcc, with the same regressors.

The lack of response to fair and unfair responses could also be seen as
a blunted response to a social reward and thus could represent social
anhedonia, a common symptom of depression in which appreciation for
social interactions is diminished (Gradin et al., 2015). We therefore
hypothesize that anhedonia-related symptoms of depression may be driving
any observed correlations between BDI change and neural recovery in our
ROIs. To address this possibility, we regress $\Delta r$ against the BDI
anhedonia subscore ($BDI_a$), calculated by summing the
scores on questions related to low motivation and reward responsiveness
(questions 4, 12, 15, and 21) to determine to what extent anhedonia
symptoms drive any neural findings (Pizzagalli et al., 2005). We
therefore expect that the correlation between both the NAcc response to
fairness and the mOCC response to inequality will be a better fit for
the data than than that for the overall BDI score. Shown in Figure 7 is
expected data for these regressions.

<center>
Anhedonia BDI subscore model: $\Delta r_{Comparison,h,t} = \alpha_0 + \alpha_1 * \Delta BDI_a$
</center>

We also regress inter-temporal changes in ROI responsiveness (Δr) on the
two BDI-II subscale scores (noncognitive and cognitive dimensions) to
identify which subscale is most strongly linked to UG neural/behavioral
differences between the MDD group and controls (Kumar et al., 2002).

<center>
Cog./noncognitive subscales: $\Delta r_{Comparison,h,t} = \alpha_0 + \alpha_1 * \Delta BDI_{noncognitive,t} + \alpha_2 * \Delta BDI_{cognitive,t}$
</center>

<img src="https://i.imgur.com/m5Nj7AF.jpg" width="60%" />
<div class="item__description">
    <p><b>Figure 6.</b> Expected results pertaining to the nucleus accumbens
(NAcc) response to fair offers (top) and medial occipital lobe (mOCC)
ROI response to unfair offers over time. Left: Change in neural response
to fairness or unfairness, respectively, over time for control (black
trace) and MDD (red trace) subjects. Right, correlation between
individual subjects’ change in BDI score from the baseline scan to the
3yr scan regressed against the neural response to fairness for the
respective brain regions. We additionally hypothesize a nearly identical
pattern seen in the DC in response to fair responses.
</p>
</div>

<img src="https://i.imgur.com/zDdfNjJ.jpg" width = "50%"/>
<div class="item__description">
    <p><b>Figure 7.</b> Expected difference between the correlation between the
change in neural activity in the NAcc (left) and mOCC (right) when
regressed against the overall BDI score change (light red) and BDI
anhedonia subscore ($BDI_a$), calculated as in
Pizzagalli et al. (2005) and as described above. Inset: R2 value
calculated for each correlation.</p>
</div>

## Limitations

While we believe the proposed experimental design is robust, several
important confounds may limit the interpretation of our data. It is
possible that, as an effect of administering the same procedure to
participants every six months for three years, task familiarity will
result in adaptation. That is, longitudinal changes in the hemodynamic
response to inequity or unfairness observed in our ROIs may simply be a
result of increasing familiarity with the task. We hope that the
six-month intervals between scans will reduce this risk and will allow
us to minimize such familiarity effects. Additionally, rather than
assessing increased neural/behavioral sensitivities per se, we examine
these sensitivities relative to controls. If convergence is observed
despite longitudinal changes in both groups due to task familiarity,
then one possible interpretation is that SSRI treatment induced
normalization in fairness/inequity sensitivity. However, it may be that
task familiarity affects control subjects and MDD patients differently.
With a large enough sample size, we may be able to assess this
possibility; if MDD patients showing minimal SSRI response exhibit
similar changes to those of controls over time, but patients exhibiting
robust SSRI response do not, then convergence may be more readily
attributed to symptom reduction. If all groups exhibit a similar
pattern, however, we must qualify our conclusions accordingly.

Another limitation is the heterogeneity we expect to see both in MDD
etiology/symptomatology and in SSRI treatment response. Many symptoms
can occur separately or together: anhedonia, weight changes, disordered
sleep, lack of energy, attention deficit, etc. As noted previously,
depression can have somatic, affective, and cognitive dimensions. Even
within the class, SSRIs comprise a group of medications that are
chemically diverse and, while all block reuptake mechanisms, are
differently metabolized, exhibit differential off-target neurochemical
effects, and, as a result, have different side effect profiles (Coleman
and Goeaux, 2018). As such, longitudinal changes may differ amongst
subjects according to the specific medication and the precise nature of
their MDD symptomatology. While we hope to leverage the heterogeneity
that results using regression analyses, should there be differences in
neural signatures or behaviors that correlate with individual symptoms
or specific SSRIs they may affect the statistical robustness of the
study. Further studies may also inform this question by examining these
neural signatures in patient groups displaying risk factors for SSRI
non-response, such as the serotonin transporter polymorphism SLC6A4
(Luddington et al., 2009; El-Mallakh et al., 2019).

Relatedly, in the present studies we have limited our sample to patients
undergoing treatment with SSRIs. There are, however, a variety of other
treatments in use for MDD, including norepinephrine reuptake inhibition,
monoamine oxidase inhibition, NMDA receptor antagonism, brain
stimulation, and cognitive therapy (Tran et al., 2019). We chose to
limit our findings to SSRIs because they are current first-line
antidepressants; because there is known heterogeneity in response that
is itself of interest in these studies; and because we are interested in
controlling, as much as is reasonable, for the specific effects of
pharmacological treatment on our results. Nonetheless, any findings we
uncover may therefore not be generalizable to all patient populations.
Further studies undertaken to examine the effects under other treatment
conditions would be necessary to determine the generalizability of these
effects. Nonetheless, these results will address whether medication can
normalize brain states that are associated with depression
symptomatology.

It is additionally possible that we will fail to replicate the NAcc, DC,
and mOCC neural activity decreases in response to fairness/unfairness in
our MDD subjects. We do not anticipate that we will fail to detect all
three of these neural signatures described in Gradin et al., as each
have been reported to show disruption in MDD studies across multiple
experimental conditions (Kerestes et al., 2014; Li et al., 2013; Zhou et
al., 2020; Bewernick et al., 2012; Bewernick et al., 2010; Robson et
al., 2020). However, should we fail to detect alterations in any of
these pre-identified areas, we will perform a voxelwise whole brain
analysis from the data collected during the baseline scan to identify
novel ROIs that show event-related changes during UG performance and,
instead, track these throughout the longitudinal phase of the study.

Another limitation concerns the social gameplay inherent to the UG. It
is possible that, because our subjects will be playing against a
computer without a physical partner in the room, that we will fail to
detect differences in brain regions due to fairness or unfairness of the
offer based on the simple fact that the lack of a human partner will
dilute the social value of the game for the scanned participant. Should
this occur we expect that we will be able to detect this effect in our
controls as well, in the form of a blunted NAcc/DC response to fair
offers and a blunted mOCC response to unfair offers, similar to the
effects predicted in MDD patients. If this arises with initial subjects,
we will include an experimenter acting as the proposer in the room, who
will offer through a headset worn into the fMRI scanner. If this effect
is truly due to a depersonalization and thus reduction in the reward
value of the outcome due to the computerized gameplay, we would expect
to see a recovery of the blunting in control subjects but not in MDD
subjects.

A final important consideration concerns the relationship between
depression symptom severity and neural patterns. We hypothesize that
neural patterns will change as depression severity improves following
SSRI treatments. However, as these experiments address outstanding
questions in the field, it is very possible that neural responses to
fairness and inequity in our ROIs will not track with BDI-II score
changes. We would interpret these results to indicate that responses to
fairness may be not a dynamic result of psychiatric condition but
instead a static factor indicating the possible lifetime presence of
MDD.

Most of the individual components of this experiment are
well-established; performing tasks in the context of fMRI, the task
itself, the proposed data analyses, and the means of subject recruitment
have all been performed by numerous studies in the past. The
experimental procedures therefore do not represent high-risk aspects of
the proposal. However, as with any longitudinal study, there is a major
risk of subject attrition that could impact the statistical robustness
of the final data. We hope that limiting the scanning interval to three
years will allow us to strike a balance between the ability to capture
longitudinal effects and remission following SSRI treatment in our MDD
sample, while also limiting subject attrition due to uncontrollable
factors. To encourage completion, all participants will be compensated
for each session at a flat rate plus a percentage of total earnings from
the UG. Ideally, this second component of subjects’ earnings will also
encourage them to play the UG as they would if all offers were paid out.

In sum, the studies proposed here would substantially advance our
understanding of the stability of neural signatures of neuroeconomic
gameplay in MDD. The longitudinal study design will robustly address the
outstanding question of whether signatures of depression represent a
static state or a dynamic trait that resolves with successful treatment.
Data collected here will also further our understanding—currently
lacking—of the stability of neural signatures of economic gameplay. The
design of this study could subsequently be extended to examine other
disorders that disrupt social reward-processing, including schizophrenia
and social anxiety disorders (Goldin et al., 2009; Bjorkquist and
Herbener, 2013). We therefore believe the proposed studies will be
impactful and trans-diagnostically relevant.

## References

Bewernick, B., Kayser, S., Sturm, V. et al. Long-Term Effects of Nucleus
Accumbens Deep Brain Stimulation in Treatment-Resistant Depression:
Evidence for Sustained Efficacy. *Neuropsychopharmacol* 37, 1975–1985
(2012). <https://doi.org/10.1038/npp.2012.44>

Bewernick BH, Hurlemann R, Matusch A, Kayser S, Grubert C, Hadrysiewicz
B, Axmacher N, Lemke M, Cooper-Mahkorn D, Cohen MX, Brockmann H, Lenartz
D, Sturm V, Schlaepfer TE. Nucleus accumbens deep brain stimulation
decreases ratings of depression and anxiety in treatment-resistant
depression. *Biol Psychiatry*. 2010 Jan 15;67(2):110-6. doi:
10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.09.013. PMID: 19914605.

Bjorkquist OA, Herbener ES. Social perception in schizophrenia: evidence
of temporo-occipital and prefrontal dysfunction. *Psychiatry Res*.
2013;212(3):175-182. <doi:10.1016/j.pscychresns.2012.12.002>

Carrozzino D, Patierno C, Fava G, A, Guidi J: The Hamilton Rating Scales
for Depression: A Critical Review of Clinimetric Properties of Different
Versions. *Psychother Psychosom* 2020;89:133-150. doi: 10.1159/000506879

Coleman JA, Gouaux E. Structural basis for recognition of diverse
antidepressants by the human serotonin transporter. *Nat Struct Mol
Biol*. 2018;25(2):170-175. <doi:10.1038/s41594-018-0026-8>

El-Mallakh RS, Ali Z. Therapeutic implications of the serotonin
transporter gene in depression. *Biomarkers in Neuropsychiatry*. 2019;
1:100004. Doi: 10.1016/j.bionps.2019.100004

Gaynes BN, Warden D, Trivedi MH, Wisniewski SR, Fava M, Rush AJ. What
did STAR\*D teach us? Results from a large-scale, practical, clinical
trial for patients with depression. *Psychiatr Serv*.
2009;60(11):1439-1445. <doi:10.1176/ps.2009.60.11.1439>

Gradin VB, Pérez A, MacFarlane JA, et al. Abnormal brain responses to
social fairness in depression: an fMRI study using the Ultimatum Game.
*Psychol Med*. 2015;45(6):1241-1251. <doi:10.1017/S0033291714002347>

Goldin PR, Manber T, Hakimi S, Canli T, Gross JJ. Neural bases of social
anxiety disorder: emotional reactivity and cognitive regulation during
social and physical threat. *Arch Gen Psychiatry*. 2009;66(2):170-180.
<doi:10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2008.525>

Jung, W. Y., Jang, S. H., Kim, S. G., Jae, Y. M., Kong, B. G., Kim, H.
C., Choe, B. M., Kim, J. G., & Kim, C. R. (2016). Times to Discontinue
Antidepressants Over 6 Months in Patients with Major Depressive
Disorder. *Psychiatry investigation*, 13(4), 440–446.
<https://doi.org/10.4306/pi.2016.13.4.440>

Kerestes R, Harrison BJ, Dandash O, et al. Specific functional
connectivity alterations of the dorsal striatum in young people with
depression. *Neuroimage Clin*. 2014;7:266-272. Published 2014 Dec 27.
doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2014.12.017

Kulikov AV, Gainetdinov RR, Ponimaskin E, Kalueff AV, Naumenko VS,
Popova NK. Interplay between the key proteins of serotonin system in
SSRI antidepressants efficacy. *Expert Opin Ther Targets*.
2018;22(4):319-330. <doi:10.1080/14728222.2018.1452912>

Kumar G, Steer RA, Teitelman KB, Villacis L. Effectiveness of Beck
Depression Inventory-II subscales in screening for major depressive
disorders in adolescent psychiatric inpatients. *Assessment*. 2002
Jun;9(2):164-70. doi: 10.1177/10791102009002007. PMID: 12066831.

Li J, Xu C, Cao X, Gao Q, Wang Y, Wang Y, Peng J, Zhang K. Abnormal
activation of the occipital lobes during emotion picture processing in
major depressive disorder patients. *Neural Regen Res*. 2013 Jun
25;8(18):1693-701. doi: 10.3969/j.issn.1673-5374.2013.18.007. PMID:
25206466; PMCID: PMC4145913.

Luddington NS, Mandadapu A, Husk M, El-Mallakh RS. Clinical implications
of genetic variation in the serotonin transporter promoter region: a
review. *Prim Care Companion J Clin Psychiatry*. 2009;11(3):93-102.
<doi:10.4088/pcc.08r00656>

Mukherjee, D., Lee, S., Kazinka, R. et al. Multiple Facets of
Value-Based Decision Making in Major Depressive Disorder. *Sci Rep* 10,
3415 (2020). <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-60230-z>

NIMH.gov. Depression Fact Sheet. (2020).

Pizzagalli DA, Jahn AL, O’Shea JP. Toward an objective characterization
of an anhedonic phenotype: a signal-detection approach. *Biol
Psychiatry*. 2005;57(4):319-327. <doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2004.11.026>

Robson, S.E., Repetto, L., Gountouna, VE. et al. A review of
neuroeconomic gameplay in psychiatric disorders. *Mol Psychiatry* 25,
67–81 (2020). <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-019-0405-5>

Taghva AS, Malone DA, Rezai AR. Deep brain stimulation for
treatment-resistant depression. *World Neurosurg*. 2013
Sep-Oct;80(3-4):S27.e17-24. doi: 10.1016/j.wneu.2012.10.068. Epub 2012
Oct 27. PMID: 23111230.

Tolentino JC, Schmidt SL. DSM-5 Criteria and Depression Severity:
Implications for Clinical Practice. *Front Psychiatry*. 2018;9:450.
Published 2018 Oct 2. <doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2018.00450>

Tran BX, Ha GH, Vu GT, et al. Indices of Change, Expectations, and
Popularity of Biological Treatments for Major Depressive Disorder
between 1988 and 2017: A Scientometric Analysis. *Int J Environ Res
Public Health*. 2019;16(13):2255. Published 2019 Jun 26.
<doi:10.3390/ijerph16132255>

Trivedi MH, Rush AJ, Wisniewski SR, et al. Evaluation of outcomes with
citalopram for depression using measurement-based care in STAR\*D:
implications for clinical practice. *Am J Psychiatry*.
2006;163(1):28-40. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.163.1.28

Wessa M, Lois G. Brain Functional Effects of Psychopharmacological
Treatment in Major Depression: a Focus on Neural Circuitry of Affective
Processing. *Curr Neuropharmacol*. 2015;13(4):466-79. doi:
10.2174/1570159x13666150416224801. PMID: 26412066; PMCID: PMC4790403.

Zhao Y, Niu R, Lei D, Shah C, Xiao Y, Zhang W, Chen Z, Lui S, Gong Q.
Aberrant Gray Matter Networks in Non-comorbid Medication-Naive Patients
With Major Depressive Disorder and Those With Social Anxiety Disorder.
*Front Hum Neurosci*. 2020 Jun 10;14:172. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2020.00172.
PMID: 32587507; PMCID: PMC7298146.
