---
title: Writing to Learn
tags: writing education learning teaching Augustine scripture new-testament
published: true
---
I recently found an old book that was assigned by my 11th grade English teacher: _On Writing Well_ by William Zinsser. Mr. Brown used to use Zinsser’s name as a verb: we ought to _Zinsser-ize_—or declutter—our writing. Why use a complex word when a simple one will suffice? And why use five words when you only need two?

My writing improved a lot in Mr. Brown’s class. Since high school, my intellectual pursuits have grown more esoteric. I use terms like “multicollinearity” and “ontological priority.”

One of the things I find most refreshing about reading the Bible is that Biblical Hebrew is beautifully simple, as are its English translations. Its use of allegory, metaphor, and the like render profound truths in familiar terms.

Another book by Zinsser, which I've skimmed a bit, is titled _Writing to Learn_. In the preface, he says, “Clear writing is the logical arrangement of thought; a scientist who thinks clearly can write as well as the best writer.” My experience agrees. Books by statisticians consider numerical data as effectively as books by classicists consider ancient literature. Demonstrating this point, _Writing to Learn_ showcases lucid writing from a wide range of disciplines. In composing it, I’m sure Zinsser learned plenty.

I often tell people that I learned more during my year at Oxford than I did during three years at Penn. This was because Oxford’s writing demands constantly pushed me to learn on the job. When I tell people about the tutorial format and the extensive weekly reading lists, their first question is whether students did the reading. Many believe that lectures are the best way to educate because, through them, students can be given information without the burden of finding it themselves. The reason I learned so much at Oxford was because, there, I had to write an essay on each topic we covered. To convey knowledge, I had to first acquire it. That’s one of the reasons I decided to start this blog. In sharing ideas with others, like Zinsser, I hope to learn a thing or two as well.

I conclude with a quotation from St. Augustine's _On Christian Doctrine_, Book I. In it, he describes how sharing scriptural wisdom allows him to receive it in abundance:

>There are two things on which all interpretation of Scripture depends: the mode of ascertaining the proper meaning, and the mode of making known the meaning when it is ascertained... And presumptuous it would undoubtedly be, if I were counting on my own strength; but since my hope of accomplishing the work rests on Him who has already supplied me with many thoughts on this subject, I do not fear but that He will go on to supply what is yet wanting when once I have begun to use what He has already given. For a possession which is not diminished by being shared with others, if it is possessed and not shared, is not yet possessed as it ought to be possessed. The Lord saith "Whosoever hath, to him shall be given"(Matthew 13:12). He will give, then, to those who have; that is to say, if they use freely and cheerfully what they have received, He will add to and perfect His gifts. The loaves in the miracle were only five and seven in number before the disciples began to divide them among the hungry people. But when once they began to distribute them, though the wants of so many thousands were satisfied, they filled baskets with the fragments that were left. Now, just as that bread increased in the very act of breaking it, so those thoughts which the Lord has already vouchsafed to me with a view to undertaking this work will, as soon as I begin to impart them to others, be multiplied by His grace, so that, in this very work of distribution in which I have engaged, so far from incurring loss and poverty, I shall be made to rejoice in a marvellous increase of wealth.