---
title: Luke 10:1-12
tags: scripture cru new-testament
published: true
---
Every Friday, I meet with other Penn grad students along with our group leaders Greg, Steph, and Tyler. We talk about our lives, pray, discuss scripture, and discuss how we can share our faith with others.

I want to write about what I'm learning during these meetings and what questions as I think about these passages more. I decided to start with the subject of this week's meeting---Luke 10:1-12. I include the passage from the English Standard Version below, as given in the Cru workbook:

><sup>1</sup>After this the LORD appointed seventy-two others and send them on ahead of him, two by two, into every town and place where he himself was about to go. <sup>2</sup>And he said to them, "The harvest is plentiful, but the laborers are few. Therefore pray earnestly to the LORD of the harvest to send out laborers into his harvest. <sup>3</sup>Go your way; behold, I am sending you out as lambs in the midst of wolves. <sup>4</sup>Carry no moneybag, no knapsack, no sandals, and greet no one on the road. <sup>5</sup>Whatever house you enter, first say, 'Peace be to this house!' <sup>6</sup>And if a son of peace is there, your peace will rest upon him. But if not, it will return to you <sup>7</sup>And remain in the same house, eating and drinking what they provid, for the laborer deserves his wages. Do not go from house to house. <sup>8</sup>Whenever you enter a town and they receive you, eat what is set before you. <sup>9</sup>Heal the sick in it and say to them, 'The kingdom of God has come near to you.' <sup>10</sup>But whenever you enter a town and they do not receive you, go into its streets and say, <sup>11</sup>'Even the dust of your town that clings to our feet we wipe off against you. Nevertheless know this, that the kingdom of God has come near.' <sup>12</sup>I tell you, it will be more bearable on that day for Sodom than for that town."

There were a few threads we explored, and I'll go through them one-by-one over the next few weeks. It's likely that only knowledge of the original Greek would properly adjudicate these questions, but I feel that it is nevertheless helpful to pose them.

The focus of today's post is the following question:

**What does it mean for the LORD to send his messengers ahead of him?**

There are numerous instances in the Bible where it is said that the LORD goes before you, wherever you may go. See [here](https://bible.knowing-jesus.com/topics/God-Going-Before).

Of these, I highlight Isaiah 52:12 (ESV):

>For you shall not go out in haste, / and you shall not go in flight, / for the Lord will go before you, / and the God of Israel will be your rear guard.

The context is the return of the Jews to their homeland. According to the *New English Bible* (Oxford Study Edition), chapters 40-55 of Isaiah were written by an unknown prophet, referred to as Second Isaiah. So, this is likely not the same as the Isaiah who prophesies the coming of Immanuel.

In any case, when Jesus sends his appointees out, he warns that he is sending them defenseless, as lambs in the midst of wolves. While he says that he will follow them to these places, he does not claim to be protecting them. Perhaps this is proof of the faith of Jesus's messengers; they proclaim the good news without assurance of their safety.

I wonder why God does not provide any such assurance in this case, as he did throughout the Old Testament. This is something I will ponder further.

Someone in our discussion also noted that Jesus goes _before_ his disciples to Galilee when he is resurrected, and his disciples are to meet him there.

<break>

Matthew 28:6-9 (ESV):

><sup>6</sup>He is not here, for he has risen, as he said. Come, see the place where he lay. <sup>7</sup>Then go quickly and tell his disciples that he has risen from the dead, and behold, he is going before you to Galilee; there you will see him. See, I have told you.” <sup>8</sup>So they departed quickly from the tomb with fear and great joy, and ran to tell his disciples. <sup>9</sup>And behold, Jesus met them and said, “Greetings!” And they came up and took hold of his feet and worshiped him.

When _we_ (those presently alive) seek to bring God's kingdom nearer to others, do we precede Jesus, or has he gone before us? In a temporal sense, he has come before us. The New Testament has already been written, and it sits on many bookshelves. The church has already been founded, and its influence is widespread. There are few places we may go where Jesus hasn't already been in some form or another. However, there are many souls that do not claim him, and these are the plentiful harvests that we few laborers must reap. For these souls, we are sent ahead of him to where he himself will later go.

As "Second Isaiah" said, our Lord goes before us and is our rear guard. We aren't assured of our protection, but we have faith.