---
title: Luke 10:1-12 Part 2
tags: scripture cru new-testament
published: false
---
This post explores a second theme from the following reading from Luke:

><sup>1</sup>After this the Lord appointed seventy-two others and sent them on ahead of him, two by two, into every town and place where he himself was about to go. <sup>2</sup>And he said to them, "The harvest is plentiful, but the laborers are few. Therefore pray earnestly to the Lord of the harvest to send out laborers into his harvest. <sup>3</sup>Go your way; behold, I am sending you out as lambs in the midst of wolves. <sup>4</sup>Carry no moneybag, no knapsack, no sandals, and greet no one on the road. <sup>5</sup>Whatever house you enter, first say, 'Peace be to this house!' <sup>6</sup>And if a son of peace is there, your peace will rest upon him. But if not, it will return to you <sup>7</sup>And remain in the same house, eating and drinking what they provide, for the laborer deserves his wages. Do not go from house to house. <sup>8</sup>Whenever you enter a town and they receive you, eat what is set before you. <sup>9</sup>Heal the sick in it and say to them, 'The kingdom of God has come near to you.' <sup>10</sup>But whenever you enter a town and they do not receive you, go into its streets and say, <sup>11</sup>'Even the dust of your town that clings to our feet we wipe off against you. Nevertheless know this, that the kingdom of God has come near.' <sup>12</sup>I tell you, it will be more bearable on that day for Sodom than for that town."

**Does this passage describe how evangelism should look today?**

By all indications, these seventy-two appointees had not yet fully grasped Jesus's divinity. It was the resurrection that revealed this to Christ's followers.