---
title: Luke 10:1-12 Part 2
tags: scripture cru new-testament
published: true
---
This post explores a second theme from the following reading from Luke:

><sup>1</sup>After this the Lord appointed seventy-two others and sent them on ahead of him, two by two, into every town and place where he himself was about to go. <sup>2</sup>And he said to them, "The harvest is plentiful, but the laborers are few. Therefore pray earnestly to the Lord of the harvest to send out laborers into his harvest. <sup>3</sup>Go your way; behold, I am sending you out as lambs in the midst of wolves. <sup>4</sup>Carry no moneybag, no knapsack, no sandals, and greet no one on the road. <sup>5</sup>Whatever house you enter, first say, 'Peace be to this house!' <sup>6</sup>And if a son of peace is there, your peace will rest upon him. But if not, it will return to you <sup>7</sup>And remain in the same house, eating and drinking what they provide, for the laborer deserves his wages. Do not go from house to house. <sup>8</sup>Whenever you enter a town and they receive you, eat what is set before you. <sup>9</sup>Heal the sick in it and say to them, 'The kingdom of God has come near to you.' <sup>10</sup>But whenever you enter a town and they do not receive you, go into its streets and say, <sup>11</sup>'Even the dust of your town that clings to our feet we wipe off against you. Nevertheless know this, that the kingdom of God has come near.' <sup>12</sup>I tell you, it will be more bearable on that day for Sodom than for that town."

**How should the evangelist approach and share his/her faith with non-believers?**

By all indications, these seventy-two appointees had not yet fully grasped Jesus's divinity. It was the resurrection that revealed this to Christ's followers. Similarly, non-believers today do not grasp Christ's divinity and are far removed from his resurrection.

But perhaps spreading the propositional message of Christ's divinity is not the first step of evangelism. The first step is to commune with others: to humbly approach another's home and to be received, to share blessings with those who receive you, and to heal the sick. Upon doing so, declare that God's kingdom has come near.

People recognize goodness from its fruits. If the kingdom of God does not bear good fruit, then how can a non-believer recognize its goodness? As a convert, I can attest that God's kingdom is recognized as such when its glory is felt---when you are welcomed into it by generous others who are eager to serve you.

Luke 6:43-45:
><sup>43</sup>"For no good tree bears bad fruit, nor again does a bad tree bear good fruit, <sup>44</sup>for each tree is known by its own fruit. For figs are not gathered from thornbushes, nor are grapes picked from a bramble bush. <sup>45</sup>The good person out of the good treasure of his heart produces good, and the evil person out of his evil treasure produces evil, for out of the abundance of the heart his mouth speaks."

Some peoples' process looks something like this: approach, exhort faith, fail, condemn, and walk away. This simply does not work. One should not start with exhortation. The instruction Jesus gives is to start by simply staying where you are received. Further, his appointees are cautioned not to go from house to house but to remain in one home in each town. The process of sharing one's faith is a relational and intimate process that isn't to be rushed.

Though there are many other points to be gleaned from this passage, the two I've identified here are as follows:
1. Don't start with an exhortation.
2. Engage patiently and lovingly with those who receive you.
3. Don't just assert God's providence with words, but demonstrate it through your good deeds in his name.