---
title: 2 Timothy 4:1-8
tags: scripture cru new-testament
published: false
---
Every Friday, I meet with other Penn grad students along with our group leaders Greg, Steph, and Tyler. We talk about our lives, pray, discuss scripture, and discuss how we can share our faith with others.

Today, I want to write about what I learned from our exploration of 2 Timothy 4:1-8. I include the passage from the English Standard Version below, as given in the Cru workbook.

><sup>1</sup>I charge you in the presence of God and of Christ Jesus, who is to judge the living and the dead, and by his appearing and his kingdom: <sup>2</sup>preach the word; be ready in season and out of season; reprove, rebuke, and exhort, with complete patience and teaching. <sup>3</sup>For the time is coming when people will not endure sound teaching, but having itching ears they will accumulate for themselves teachers to suit their own passions, <sup>4</sup>and will turn away from listening to the truth and wander off into myths. <sup>5</sup>As for you, always be sober-minded, endure suffering, do the work of an evangelist, fulfill your ministry.

><sup>6</sup>For I am already being poured out as a drink offering, and the time of my departure has come. <sup>7</sup>I have fought the good fight, I have finished the race, I have kept the faith. <sup>8</sup>Henceforth there is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, will award to me on that day, and not only to me but also to all who have loved his appearing.

There were a few threads we explored, and I'll go through them one by one.

**What good preaching entails**

>...preach the word; be ready in season and out of season; reprove, rebuke, and exhort, with complete patience and teaching.

What are the seasons that Paul is referring to? Well, the simplest answer is that it doesn't matter because one should be ready to preach the word in all seasons, regardless of how they're defined. 

But to better understand how we can follow Paul's advice, it is helpful to think through how our experiences echo his warning.

I'm fairly new to Christian faith, and I can say that my faith sometimes ebbs and flows. While my new belief in God feels unshakeable, I often fail to turn toward him. In that sense, I may experience times that are _personally_ out of season. I'm not sure this is something Paul intends to naturalize, but, during such times, I should still be ready to serve witness to God's glory. Even when I'm not feeling God's providence, I still know it to be real; I've experienced it before.

One must also be ready to preach throughout others' seasons.



Patience and teaching

**Cherry-picking and confirmation bias**


**Being sober-minded**


**Paul being poured out as a drink offering**